Prof. Julia Herzen
Prof. Andreas Bausch
Prof. Ulrich Gerland
Introduction to Biophysics
Winter Semester 2025/26, Exercise Sheet 11
Problem 11.1 Membrane transport and membrane potential
Which of the following statements are true? Explain why or why not?
Transport by transporters can be either active or passive, whereas transport by channels
is always passive.
Transporters saturate at high concentrations of the transported molecule when all their
binding sites are occupied; channels, on the other hand, do not bind the ions they
transport and thus the flux of ions through a channel does not saturate.
The membrane potential arises from movements of charge that leave ion concentrations
practically unaffected, causing only a very slight discrepancy in the number of positive
and negative ions on the two sides of the membrane.
Problem 11.2 Changing the membrane potential via ion transport
Consider a spherical cell with radius R = 100 μm. The capacitance of the cell membrane is
1 μF/cm2. How much charge needs to be transported across the membrane in order to change
the voltage across the membrane by 100 mV? If this charge transfer occurs via monovalent
ions, what is the corresponding change in intracellular ion concentration? How does this
concentration change compare to typical absolute concentrations of intracellular ions? How
does this change, if the cell has a radius of only R = 1 μm?
Problem 11.3 Membrane potential by Na+ and K+
The squid giant axon occupies a unique position in the history of our understanding of cell
membrane potentials and nerve action. When an electrode is stuck into an intact giant axon,
the membrane potential registers –70 mV. When the axon, suspended in a bath of seawater,
is stimulated to conduct a nerve impulse, the membrane potential changes transiently from
–70 mV to +40 mV.
For univalent ions and at 20 ◦C (293 K), the Nernst equation reduces to
V = 25.2 mV ln Co
Ci
where Co and Ci are the concentrations outside and inside, respectively.
Using this equation, calculate the potential across the resting membrane (1) assuming
that it is due solely to K+ and (2) assuming that it is due solely to Na+. (The Na+ and K+
concentrations in axon cytoplasm and in seawater are given in Table 1.) Which calculation is
closer to the measured resting potential? Which calculation is closer to the measured action
potential? Explain why these assumptions approximate the measured resting and action
potential.
1

ION CYTOPLASM SEAWATER
Na+ 65 mM 430 mM
K+ 344 mM 9 mM
Table 1: Ionic composition of seawater and of cytoplasm from the squid giant axon.
2