Introduction to Biophysics
Technische Universität München
Wintersemester 2025/2026
Prof. Julia Herzen, Prof. Andreas Bausch, Prof. Ulrich Gerland
Solutions to Exercise Sheet 8
Problem 8.1
True. The human karyotype comprises 22 autosomes and the two sex chromosomes,
X and Y. Females have 22 autosomes and two X chromosomes for a total of 23
different chromosomes. Males also have 22 autosomes, but have an X and a Y
chromosome for a total of 24 different chromosomes.
True. Humans and mice diverged from a common ancestor long enough ago for
roughly 2 out of 3 nucleotides to have been changed by random mutation. The re-
gions that have been conserved are those with important functions, where mutations
with deleterious effects were eliminated by natural selection. Other regions have
not been conserved because natural selection cannot operate to eliminate changes
in nonfunctional DNA.
True. All the core histones are rich in lysine and arginine, which have basic-positively
charged-side chains that can neutralize the negatively charged DNA backbone.
False. By using the energy of ATP hydrolysis, chromatin remodeling complexes can
catalyze the movement of nucleosomes along DNA, or even between segments of
DNA.
True. Duplication of chromosomal segments, which may include one or more genes,
allows one of the two genes to diverge over time to acquire different, but related
functions. The process of gene duplication and divergence is thought to have played
a major role in the evolution of biological complexity.
Problem 8.2
A dicentric chromosome is unstable because the two kinetochores have the potential to
interfere with one another. Normally, microtubules from the two poles of the spindle ap-
paratus attach to opposite faces of a single kinetochore in order to separate the individual
chromatids at mitosis. If a chromosome contains two centromeres, half of the time the
microtubules from one of the poles will attach to the two kinetochores associated with one
chromatid, while the microtubules from the other pole will attach to the two kinetochores
associated with the other chromatid. Division can then occur satisfactorily. The other
half of the time, the microtubules from each pole will attach to kinetochores that are
associated with different chromatids. When that happens, each chromatid will be pulled
to opposite spindle poles with enough force to snap it in two. Thus, two centromeres are
bad for a chromosome, causing chromosome breaks-rendering it unstable.

Introduction to Biophysics: Solutions to Exercise Sheet 9
Problem 8.3
With these assumptions, the DNA is compacted 27-fold in 30-nm fibers relative to the
extended DNA. The total length of duplex DNA in 50 nm of the fiber is 1360 nm [(20
nucleosome) × (200 bp/nucleosome) × (0.34 nm/bp) = 1360 nm). 1360 nm of duplex
DNA reduced to 50 nm of chromatin fiber represents a 27-fold condensation [(1360 nm/50
nm) = 27.2]. This level of packing represents 0.27% (27/10000) of the total condensation
that occurs at mitosis, still a long way off what is needed.
2